#+TITLE: Concerns about Preferential Voting

* Preferential Voting Procedure

From Chang Kee's ELBNF talk

i) Voting will take place using a secret online ballot.

ii) The election will use the Preferential Voting System (PVS),
allowing the election to proceed in a single stage.

iii) Each institute will provide a ballot paper giving a ranked list
of all candidates standing.

iv) For each institute, the top ranked choice receives one vote in
each round of counting, the candidate with the fewest votes is
eliminated from ballots tallied in each subsequent round of
counting. If an instituteâ€™s top preferences is eliminated, their vote
is transferred to their second preference, etc. The process of
eliminating candidates continues until the top candidate receives a
majority of the ballots cast.

* Concerns

This section gives some concerns over the preferential voting procedure as stated above.

** Vote collecting

Simply saying a "secret online ballot" leaves much to the imagination
and is ripe for abuse, intentional or accidental.  It also says in iii
that a ballot /paper/ is provided.  How "online" and "paper" is to
work is a mystery.

But, assuming the best, there are still some specific concerns:

 - How to confirm that all ballots are accepted?
 - How to confirm no error in ballot processing?
 - How to assure only authorized voters participate?
 - How to assure no double voting?

*** Addressing the Concerns

Ideally, public key cryptography (PGP) is used during submission of
votes.  The ballot should be signed with the voter's private key and
encrypted with the PVS's public key.  The public keys of eligible
voters should be collected by the PVS in a manner that confirms the
identity of the voter.

However, it is expected that the entire electorate is not capable of
dealing with this cryptography.  Instead a weaker approach is
suggested which relies on the voter's "well known" email address as
being a definitive identifier.  The procedure is thus:

1) The PVS sends an /invitation/ email to the voter which contains a
   unique user name, password and a PVS URL.

2) The voter follows the URL and supplies the /username/ and
   /password/ and the PVS authenticates the voter.

3) Through a presented web form, the voter ranks the candidates by
   assigning an integer value to each candidate (1..N, N=number of
   candidates, 1=most desired).  The PVS performs input validation to
   assure no duplication of rank and that all candidates are ranked.

4) Through the form the voter must also supply a /voter phrase/
   (an arbitrarily character string chosen by the voter).

5) On submit of the form, the PVS creates a string termed the /vote/
   which consists of a comma-separated list of the following elements,
   in order:

   - The voter's given /username/,
   - The /voter phrase/.
   - A comma-separated list of candidates (/candidate ranking/) in order of the voter's ranking.

6) The PVS runs SHA1 hash function on the /vote/.  This is the /hash/.

7) On response, the PVS presents the /vote/ and the /hash/ to the
   voter and the voter is encouraged to make a copy.  The PVS also
   sends this information to the voter's email address.

8) The PVS permanently records the /vote/

*** Discussion of this suggestion

This addresses the concerns in the following way:

- To the extent that the voter's email address is correct and
  trustworthy a unique token is issued by the PVS to the voter in a
  way that can not be trivially forged.

- Subsequent attempts of a voter to vote will be blocked as the
  initial /vote/ is contains the /username/

- The associated /hash/ and /candidate ranking/ can be publicly
  disclosed for all votes without breaking secret ballot.  This
  allows:

   - Confirmation by anyone that the outcome is fair as they can rerun the voting algorithm.
   - Confirmation by any individual voter that their /vote/ was correctly accepted and used.



** Voting Procedure

The voting procedure as written in "iv" above is not incompletely specified.  In particular:

- What is to occur if a round of voting ends in more than one
  candidate with the same and fewest number of votes?

One scenario is to remove all "losing tied" candidates.  This can
leave the field with two few candidates to continue.  For example a
three candidate field with a non-majority leader and two tied for
second place.  Removing both would lead to a winner that may not have
a majority.

Another scenario is to arbitrarily pick choose one of the "loosing
tied" candidates and continue with the next voting round.  This may
lead to different outcomes depending on the nature of the choice.

A Wikipedia article on Instant-runoff voting, from which it looks like
the above description was taken has a [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instant-runoff_voting#Handling_ties][broken link]] referencing rules
for breaking such ties.  But it does suggest one can remove all of the
lowest ranking candidates such that their combined votes are less than
the remaining other lowest candidates.  This doesn't solve the first
scenario.



** Pure email based variant

Given that the time is short to do this vote it is worth pointing out
that the voting procedure can be carried out with just a single person
and their email client providing the role of the "PVS".  This approach
creates an added burden on both the human taking on the role of the
PVS and the individual voters.  In particular, the formatting of
ballots must be correctly handled to assure reproducible hashes can be
calculated and to allow for automated parsing to apply the vote
algorithm.  Assistance can be had in the form of some scripts such as
the ones provided in the [[https://github.com/brettviren/preferential-voting][repository]] associated with this note.

This extra burden is maybe acceptable as it requires very little
up-front effort compared to developing a new web application.  With
the suggested process below the vote will be relatively secure from
malicious intent or simple accidents although it requires the PVS
agent to retain and handle information that associates a voter with
their vote. They should take measures not to disclose this association
if secret ballot is to be preserved.  In the following, "PVS" is the
administrator of the voting.

1) PVS sends email to each voter using their well known address (eg, the one registered in the [[https://lbne.bnl.gov/newcollab/][collaborator database]].

2) The message includes a text file (ASCII encoding) attachment with the candidates arranged in alphabetical order, one candidate per line.

3) The voter is instructed to edit this text file in order to reorder the candidates according to their desired ranking and return it as an ASCII encoded text file.

4) The voter must also provide a /voter phrase/ in the return email.

5) Upon receipt, the PVS will check that no ballot from this email address  has yet been received.  

6) The PVS will save the returned text ballot to their secure disk and assure that the text file does not have any extraneous edits (this can be automated with a script).  If cosmetic edits are necessary to enforce proper format, they will be made by the PVS.

7) The properly formatted /vote/ (as defined above) is produced based on this file (using an automated script), its /hash/ is calculated and the /hash/ + /candidate ranking/ strings are saved to the PVS's secure disk and are also returned to the voter.

8) The voter may validate the hash.

9) At close of voting all /hash/ + /candidate rankings/ are published to the collaboration.

10) The PVS processes the vote and declares the winners.  Any in the collaboration may confirm the result using the published information.  Individual voters may confirm their vote is represented.



